TECHNICAL MEMORANDUM                                         TBX-26-008

SUBJECT:      The invisible BLE write queue - why fat visualizer frames
              lagged the music, and pacing by the box's own acks
DATE:         2026-07-15
STATUS:       FINAL - queue depth and link capacity measured live;
              fix verified against the panel under worst-case load


SUMMARY. The 30-band stereo tunnel fell progressively behind the music
- about one second of extra lag for every eight seconds played - while
the daemon's own backlog drain (TBX-26-005) reported nothing wrong.
The lag was real but lived BELOW the daemon: image chunks go out as
BLE write-without-response, which "completes" the moment bluezd queues
the bytes, not when the radio sends them. Any recipe producing more
chunks per second than the link carries piles the difference into an
unbounded queue inside bluezd that no daemon-side check can see. The
box turns out to acknowledge every image write with a notification;
the visualizer now waits for that ack before rendering the next frame,
which caps the queue at one frame and turns overload into dropped
frames instead of growing lag.

1. THE SYMPTOM, AND WHY THE DRAIN MISSED IT. TBX-26-005 added a
capture-side drain: before each render, skip to the newest audio frame
so slow BLE writes cost frames, not latency. That logic is correct and
was working. But it bounds only the AUDIO side of the pipeline. The
write side looked instant - static_image() returned in ~2 ms - because
bleak on BlueZ maps write-without-response to a D-Bus WriteValue of
type "command": bluezd accepts the bytes immediately and transmits
them whenever the connection interval allows. Produce faster than the
radio drains and the excess queues silently, growing without bound,
while every daemon-side measure of "how far behind am I" reads zero.

2. MEASURING THE QUEUE. Two numbers settle it. Handing 50 worst-case
frames (350 chunks of <=138 bytes) to bluezd took 0.08 seconds; a
write-with-response barrier queued behind them - ATT is ordered, so
its response returns only after everything ahead has been transmitted
- came back after 5.64 seconds. A 70x gap between "sent" and "sent".
That flush time gives the sustained link capacity: ~62 chunks/second
on this box. Against the recipes:

    default bars  (16 bands, mono)    ~5 chunks/frame    51 chunks/s
    tunnel stereo (15 bands)          ~6 chunks/frame    60 chunks/s
    tunnel stereo (30 bands)          ~7 chunks/frame    70 chunks/s

The image payload is palette + indexed pixels, so chunk count follows
COLOR DIVERSITY, not band count directly: stereo doubles the distinct
(hue, brightness) pairs per ring, and 30 bands ran ~74 colors per
frame against ~40 for the default. At 10 fps that is 70 chunks/s into
a 62 chunks/s pipe - the operator's report ("backlog over time")
reproduced exactly, at roughly +1 s of lag per 8 s of music. Note how
close the 15-band stereo recipe sits to the ceiling: it merely
happened to work.

3. THE BOX ACKS EVERY FRAME. The notification stream (buffered but
undecoded by the library) has a fixed shape on this firmware:

    01 <len16> 04 <cmd> 55 <body...>

with cmd echoing the opcode being answered: 44 after every image
write, 45 after a channel switch, 33 once per received chunk, f7
heartbeats. Pushing five frames at 10 fps returned five cmd=44 acks,
one per frame, arriving only after the box had the whole frame. That
is a flow-control signal for free: no extra writes, no timers, paced
by the actual radio.

4. THE FIX. _push_frame() wraps the panel write: send the frame, then
wait for a cmd=44 ack before returning, bounded at 2 seconds so a
lost notification cannot wedge the stream (TBX-26-006: every await on
an external stack is bounded), with a log line on timeout rather than
silence (TBX-26-004). The capture drain upstream does the rest: while
one frame waits for its ack, arriving audio piles into the reader and
the next iteration skips to the newest frame. Net behavior: recipes
within capacity run at full 10 fps (the ack returns inside the frame
budget); recipes beyond it self-pace to what the link carries (~9 fps
for the 30-band stereo tunnel) holding a constant one-frame latency.
The queue cannot grow because frame N+1 is not even rendered until
frame N is out of the radio.

5. DISPOSITION. Fixed in timebox_daemon.py (_is_frame_ack,
_push_frame; both static_image call sites in the visualizer route
through it), ack recognition pinned by checks against live-captured
notification bytes, README notes the capacity ceiling next to the
recipes. The general lesson pairs with TBX-26-005: bounding one side
of a pipeline is not bounding the pipeline. Every fire-and-forget
boundary hides a queue, and the only trustworthy backpressure comes
from the far end - here, literally waiting for the box to say "got
it" before drawing the next picture.
